Add DADA2 tutorial (#4965)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/microbiome/tutorials/dada-16S/tutorial.md

> 3. Are the reverse reads good quality?
> 4. What would you recommend as threshold for trimming?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> >
> > 1. The forward reads are good quality
> > 2. These quality profiles do not suggest that any additional trimming is needed. We will truncate the forward reads at position 240 (trimming the last 10 nucleotides).
> > 3. The reverse reads are of significantly worse quality, especially at the end, which is common in Illumina sequencing. This isn’t too worrisome, as DADA2 incorporates quality information into its error model which makes the algorithm robust to lower quality sequence, but trimming as the average qualities crash will improve the algorithm’s sensitivity to rare sequence variants.
> > 
> >    ![Quality Profiles for every samples with read length on the X-axis and Quality score on the Y-axis](./images/plotQualityProfile_reverse.png)
> >    
> > 4. Based on the profiles, we will truncate the reverse reads at position 160 where the quality distribution crashes.
> > 
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

> <comment-title>Considerations for your own data</comment-title>
>

> > Your reads must still overlap after truncation in order to merge them later! The tutorial is using 2x250 V4 sequence data, so the forward and reverse reads almost completely overlap and our trimming can be completely guided by the quality scores. If you are using a less-overlapping primer set, like V1-V2 or V3-V4, your truncated length must be large enough to maintain $$ 20 + biological.length.variation $$ nucleotides of overlap between them.

Reviewer: Can you add the info on how long V4 is? Then readers will know easier why the reads overlap.

Author: Done

   >
   > > <solution-title></solution-title>
   > >
   > > In F3D0 element in the collection, we see:
   > > 1. `reads.in`: 7793
   > > 2. `reads.out`: 7113
   > >
   > {: .solution}
   >
   {: .question}

To better see the impact of filtering and trimming, we can inspect the read quality profiles and compare to the profiles before.

<div class="Step-by-step" markdown="1">

> <hands-on-title>Inspect read quality profiles after Filter And Trim</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [dada2: plotQualityProfile](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/dada2_plotqualityprofile/dada2_plotQualityProfile/1.28+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Processing mode"*: `Joint`
>        - *"Paired reads"*: `paired - in a data set pair`
>            - {% icon param-collection %} *"Paired short read data"*: `Paired reads` output of **dada2: filterAndTrim**
>        - *"Aggregate data"*: `No`
>    - *"sample number"*: `10000000`
>
{: .hands_on}

</div>

> <question-title></question-title>
>
> Looking at outputs of **plotQualityProfile** for reverse reads before and after **dada2: filterAndTrim**
> 
> {% snippet faqs/galaxy/features_scratchbook.md %}
>

> > ![Quality Profiles for every samples with read length on the X-axis and Quality score on the Y-axis](./images/plotQualityProfile_reverse.png "Quality profiles for reverse reads before trimming and filtering")

Reviewer: Same as above.

Reviewer: every samples -> the forward/reverse reads of all samples

Author: Modified. Thanks

>

> > ![Quality Profiles for every samples with read length on the X-axis and Quality score on the Y-axis](./images/plotQualityProfile_reverse_after_filter_trim.png "Quality profiles for reverse reads after trimming and filtering")

Reviewer: Same as above

>
> How did trimming and filtering change the quality profiles for reverse reads?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> >
> > The reads have been trimmed making the profiles looking better. 
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

## Learn the Error Rates

The DADA2 algorithm makes use of a parametric error model (`err`) and every amplicon dataset has a different set of error rates. The **dada2: learnErrors** method learns this error model from the data, by alternating estimation of the error rates and inference of sample composition until they converge on a jointly consistent solution. As in many machine-learning problems, the algorithm must begin with an initial guess, for which the maximum possible error rates in this data are used (the error rates if only the most abundant sequence is correct and all the rest are errors).

<div class="Step-by-step" markdown="1">

**dada2: learnErrors** tool expects as input one collection and not a paired collection. We then need to split to paired collection into 2 collections: one with forward reads and one with reverse reads.

> <hands-on-title> Unzip paired collection </hands-on-title>
>

> > 1. {% tool [Unzip collection](__UNZIP_COLLECTION__) %} with the following parameters:

Reviewer: What I always do is to add name tags `#forward` and `#reverse` to the collection. Then it's much more difficult to mix up samples.

But renaming the datasets is fine as well.

Author: Good point. I modified the tutorial to use the tags

>
> 1. Are the estimated error rates (black line) in a good fit to the observed rates (points) for the forward reads?
> 2. What about the reverse reads?
>
>    ![Error rates for each possible transition as a function of the associated quality score, the final estimated error rates, the initial input rates, and the expected error rates under the nominal definition of quality scores](./images/learnErrors_reverse.png "Error rates for each possible transition for the reverse reads")
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> >
> > 1. The estimated error rates (black line) are a good fit to the observed rates (points), and the error rates drop with increased quality as expected. Everything looks reasonable and we proceed with confidence.
> > 2. Same
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}
 

## Infer Sample Composition 

In this step, the core sample inference algorithm ({% cite Callahan_2016 %}) is applied to the filtered and trimmed sequence data.

<div class="Step-by-step" markdown="1">

> <hands-on-title> Sample Inference </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [dada2: dada](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/dada2_dada/dada2_dada/1.28+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters:

> >    - *"Process samples in batches"*: `no`

Reviewer: For advanced users we might add that choosing `yes` for `Process samples in batches` gives identical results as `no` if samples are not pooled.

- no: a single Galaxy job is started where the samples are processed sequentially
- yes: a separate Galaxy job is started for each sample (given compute resources this can be much faster)

Also the sorting of the collection is only needed for the no case.

Author: Added as a comment

>    - *"Process samples in batches"*: `no`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Reads"*: `reverse` output of **Unzip collection**
>        - *"Pool samples"*: `process samples individually`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Error rates"*: `errors for reverse reads`
>
> 4. Rename output collection to `sample inference for reverse reads`
{: .hands_on}

</div>

We can look at the number of true sequence variants from unique sequences have been inferred by **DADA2**.

> <hands-on-title> Inspect number of true sequence variants from unique sequences </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Click one output collection of **dada2: dada**
> 2. Click on {% icon details %} *Show Details*
> 2. Expant *Tool Standard Output*
{: .hands_on}

> <question-title></question-title>
>
> 1. How many unique sequences are in forward reads for sample F3D0?
> 2. How many true sequence variants from unique sequences have been inferred by DADA2 for this dataset?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> >
> > 1. 7113 reads in 1979 unique sequences
> > 2. 128 sequence variants were inferred from 1979 input unique sequences.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

## Merge paired reads

> We now merge the forward and reverse reads together to obtain the full denoised sequences. Merging is performed by aligning the denoised forward reads with the reverse-complement of the corresponding denoised reverse reads, and then constructing the merged "contig" sequences. By default, merged sequences are only output if the forward and reverse reads overlap by at least 12 bases, and are identical to each other in the overlap region (but these conditions can be changed via function arguments).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now merge the forward and reverse reads together to obtain the full denoised sequences. Merging is performed by aligning the denoised forward reads with the reverse-complement of the corresponding denoised reverse reads, and then constructing the merged "contig" sequences. By default, merged sequences are only output if the forward and reverse reads overlap by at least 12 bases, and are identical to each other in the overlap region (but these conditions can be changed via tool parameters).
```

>    - *"Method"*: `NMDS`
>    - *"Transform"*: `Prop`
>    - *"Color"*: `When`
{: .hands_on}

![Graph with NMDS1 on X axis and NMDS2 on Y axis. The points are colored in red for early and blue for late](./images/ordination.png)

> <question-title></question-title>
>
> Is there a clear separation between the early and late samples?
>
> > <solution-title></solution-title>
> >
> > Yes
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

## Plot abundance stacked barplot

Abundance barplots are graphical tools that display the relative abundance of different species or groups in a dataset, allowing for easy comparison and visualization of community composition and distribution patterns across samples.

Let's plot an abundance stacked barplot at the family level.

> <hands-on-title> Plot abundance stacked barplot </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Click on **Bar** tab
> 2. Select the following parameters:
>    - *"X-axis"*: `Samples`
>    - *"Color"*: `Family`
>    - *"Facet Col"*: `When`
> 3. Click on **(Re)Build Graphic**
{: .hands_on}

![Stacked barplot with sample on X-axis and abundance on Y-axis. Each bar represent the different families (in different colors) for the sample](./images/barplot1.png)

> The barplot is hard to read here: too many families in white that we can distinguish for each other. We need to filter to data to display only the most abundant families. We will select only taxa with more than 500 counts.

Author: Added explanation for families in white and a comment box for ampvis

4. Remove last line
5. Add extra column `When` to indicate if `Early` (days < 100) or `Late` (day > 100)
3. Add a header

> <hands-on-title>Prepare metadata table</hands-on-title>
> 1. {% tool [Extract element identifiers](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/collection_element_identifiers/collection_element_identifiers/0.0.2) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Dataset collection"*: output of **dada2: mergePairs**
>
>    We will now extract from the names the factors:
>
> 2. {% tool [Replace Text in entire line](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/text_processing/tp_replace_in_line/1.1.2) %}
>      - {% icon param-file %} *"File to process"*: output of **Extract element identifiers** {% icon tool %}
>      - In *"Replacement"*:
>         - In *"1: Replacement"*
>            - *"Find pattern"*: `(.)(.)D(.*)`
>            - *"Replace with"*: `\1\2D\3\t\1\t\2\t\3`
>
>     This step creates 3 additional columns with the gender, the mouse subject number and the day post-weaning
>
> 3. Change the datatype to `tabular`
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_change_datatype.md datatype="tabular" %}
>

> > 5. {% tool [Select first lines](cat1) %} to remove the last line

Author: To remove the mock, it breaks the import :(

> >    - {% icon param-file %} *"File to select"*: output of **Concatenate datasets**

Author: Bad copy / paste when I reorganised this hands-on box. Fixed

>        - *"Find pattern"*: `False`
>        - *"Replace with"*: `Early`
>      - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Replacement"*
>      - In *"3: Replacement"*
>        - *"in column"*: `Column: 2`
>        - *"Find pattern"*: `F`
>        - *"Replace with"*: `Female`
>      - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Replacement"*
>      - In *"4: Replacement"*
>        - *"in column"*: `Column: 2`
>        - *"Find pattern"*: `M`
>        - *"Replace with"*: `Male`
>
> 4. Create a new file (`header`) from the following (header line of the metadata table)
>
>    ```text
>    Sample	Gender	Mouse	Day	When
>    ```
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_create_new_file.md name="header" format="tabular" %}
>
> 5. {% tool [Concatenate datasets](cat1) %} to add this header line to the **Replace Text** output:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Concatenate Dataset"*: the `header` dataset
>    - *"Dataset"*
>       - {% icon param-repeat %} *"Insert Dataset"*
>         - {% icon param-file %} *"select"*: output of **Replace Text**
>
> 6. Rename the output to `Metadata table`
{: .hands_on}

We have now a metadata table with four columns:
1. Sample
2. Gender
3. Mouse subject

> 4. Day post-weaning 

Reviewer: Should be 5 columns

Author: Fixed

>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/interactive_tools_open.md %}
>
{: .hands_on}

A new page will be launched with Shiny-phyloseq ready to explore the phyloseq object.

## Visualize alpha-diversity

A **diversity index** is a quantitative measure that is used to assess the level of diversity or variety within a particular system, such as a biological community, a population, or a workplace. It provides a way to capture and quantify the distribution of different types or categories within a system.

Related to ecology, the term **diversity** describes the number of different species present in one particular area and their relative abundance. More specifically, several different metrics of diversity can be calculated. The most common ones are α, β and γ diversity.

The **α diversity** describes the diversity within a community. It considers the number of different species in an environment (also referred to as species **richness**). Additionally, it can take the abundance of each species into account to measure how evenly individuals are distributed across the sample (also referred to as species **evenness**).

> There are several different indexes used to calculate α diversity because different indexes capture different aspects of diversity and have varying sensitivities to different factors. These indexes have been developed to address specific research questions, account for different ecological or population characteristics, or highlight certain aspects of diversity. 

Reviewer: indexes -> indices

Author: Fixed

![Explanation of the α diversity](./images/alphadiversity_metrics.png "<a href="https://medium.com/pjtorres-high-gut-alpha-diversity-and-health/high-alpha-diversity-and-health-65e5eca7fa36">Source</a>")

Here we will plot the **α diversity** for the samples given the Days using 2 measures:

- The **Shannons** index, which calculates the uncertainty in predicting the species identity of an individual that is selected from a community ({% cite Shannon.1948 %}).

- The **Simpsons** index, which calculates the probability that two individuals selected from a community will be of the same species. Obtains small values in datasets of high diversity and large values in datasets of low diversity ({% cite SIMPSON.1949 %}).

> <hands-on-title> Plot α diversity </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Click on **Alpha Diversity** tab
> 2. Select the following parameters:
>    - *"X"*: `Day`
>    - *"Color"*: `When`
>    - *"alpha Measures"*: `Shannon`, `Simpson`
{: .hands_on}

![2 panels for 2 α diversity metrics (Shannon, Simpson) with α diversity value on Y axis and days on X axis. The points are colored given When](./images/alpha_diversity.png)

> <question-title></question-title>
>

> > Is there any obvious systematic difference in alpha-diversity between early and late samples?

Reviewer: Is there somewhere an example how an "obvious" difference would look like. Should we be clearer what we mean with difference? Smaller / larger?

Author: It would be nice to be clearer. Any suggestion there to rephrase that? I do not have inspiration tbh 😅

Reviewer: Maybe just: 

```suggestion
> Is there any obvious systematic difference in alpha-diversity between early and late samples? That is is it obviously larger or smaller in one of the sample groups?
```

>
> 1. Create a paired collection named `Raw Reads`, rename your pairs with the sample name
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/collections_build_list_paired.md %}
>
> 2. {% tool [Sort collection](__SORTLIST__) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-collection %} *"Input Collection"*: `Raw Reads`
>
> 3. Rename output collection to `Sorted Raw Reads`
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/collections_rename.md %}
>
{: .hands_on}

We can now start processing the reads using **DADA2**.

{% include _includes/cyoa-choices.html option1="Step-by-step" option2="Workflow" default="Step-by-step" text="Do you want to go step-by-step or using a workflow?" disambiguation="workflow"%}

# Processing data using DADA2

Once demultiplexed FASTQ files without non-biological nucleotides are in hand, the **DADA2** pipeline proceeds as follows:

1. Prepare reads
   1. Inspect read quality profiles
   2. Filter and trim
   3. Learn the Error Rates
   4. Infer sample composition
   5. Merge forward/reverse reads

3. Construct sequence table
   1. Make sequence table
   2. Remove chimeras
  
4. Assign taxonomy
5. Evaluate accuracy

<div class="Workflow" markdown="1">

> {% snippet faqs/galaxy/workflows_run_wfh.md title="dada2/main" wfhub_id="790" %}

Reviewer 2: excellent!

sometimes I also put this in the hands on with `box_type="none"`
